I used to look inside the “Grandpa Box”.
Every family, every house, used to have one
such box, yes?
Stuff that used to belong to Grandpa?
My Grandpa’s box had stuff like this.
His handwriting.
Scribbles by him.
Could probably have been even “correspondences
of love”!
Who knows!
I used to see a lot of such correspondence!
I used to wonder, sometimes..
Why is the handwriting such a mess?
It is completely unintelligible!
Until my Dad clarified to me that this was
actually something called Gregg’s Shorthand.
Most of us may not even know what it is because
it is no longer a relevant skill.
If somebody is dictating very fast, without
missing a single word, to write it all down,
this was a language invented for that purpose..
A phonetic, scribbling approach.
Nobody had devices back then.
Audio / Video devices.
In fact, there was no concept of LIVE, either.
This is okay..
Acceptable, given the circumstances.
But, look at this.
This is a test.
You will have to type this.
They are not asking for an answer.
They aren’t giving you a question and asking
for an answer.
They are giving you the answer!
You just have to type it out!
On a typewriter!
So many words per minute.
You have to type.
This is AFTER ChatGPT, by the way.
This is a question paper from February 2023.
Is this still a relevant skill??
Can you even dream of typing faster than a
printer can do it?
In the world of voice to text, is this even
relevant?
Is it relevant or not?
What does relevant even mean?
That is what we are going to see today.
Namaste!
We are going to see skills that are seen as
important today, and wonder if they will still
be relevant in the future.
What are the Forever Skills?
Because, see, a person working in this shop,
the classic kirana store, a grocery shop,
the challenges he faces…
Mental mathematics, decisions on restocking,
gut feels about which customer can be believed,
who owes how much to us still, where do we
start a new branch, the merchant..
Much of it, mental.
The challenges he faces, the skills he needs,
that he has been needing for generations now,
they are very different from the challenges
these people face.
A high-tech work environment.
Probably a hybrid work environment.
Probably even a timezone-separated work environment.
How do you manage somebody who is working
from home..
How do you manage, while working from home?
(Both are different things altogether, by
the way!)
The challenges are different, the skills needed
are different.
That is what we encountered when we saw this
book.
I even remember saying, “Please don’t
read this book.
We are going to revisit it!”
Forever Skills, is the name of the book.
Twelve skills to future proof yourself, your
team, and your kids!
What are those twelve skills, let us do a
short, fast journey, shall we?
But, before we get into that journey though,
I want to tell you about the three spheres
of change.
In this book, they refer to the oncoming tsunami
of change in the future, and refer to three
different sub-changes.
One is “What’s Changing”.
The other is “What’s Unchanging”.
And the third thing is, “What needs to be
Changed”!
What is remaining unchanged.
What should change.
And how do we change it.
One should look into the future from these
three dimensions — the authors say.
The twelve skills are divided into three sets
of four subskills.
So, it talks about Creativity.
If you are to differentiate yourself from
a computer, a robot, an artificially intelligent
program, that last bastion, that last skill
that will remain unchallenged, may well be
Creativity.
That is the ultimate.
That is the irreproducible.
That is the non-automatable.
(Not sure for how long though!)
The second is Communication.
You deciding to share your idea with another.
Or a group of others.
The art of persuasion.
And, finally, what are you actually capable
of, what are you incapable of, what is within
your control, what needs to be perhaps endured
because it is outside your control, that is
important to be understood.
So, in these three top-level categories, we
are going to see four skills each.
Let us run through them.
I am going to use examples from timeless stories..
Remember Aesop’s short stories, fables,
moral lessons?
We have read many, haven’t we?
I am going to weave these twelve skills along,
using those fables as the background tapestry.
The first skill in Creativity is Insight.
The Crow in this story, had an insight.
It did not just analyse the data it had.
It understood it.
That is why, it saw a pebble, and realised
that it can raise the level of the water in
the jug by dropping it into the vessel.
It looked at it from a different viewpoint.
And that helped.
And, it looked for patterns also.
It had seen something elsewhere, it saw something
similar, it raised the level of the water,
and it enjoyed.
If we were to look for another word for it,
it is “Sensemaking”.
Making sense of what you perceive in the world.
Sifting through it.
Analysing it.
Distilling it.
That is Insight.
That is going to be a very important Future
Skill.
Do you remember this story?
Sing a song?
Doughnut drops from the crow’s beak.
They call it Conversion.
What is Conversion?
Well, only if you are absorbing numerous things,
all the time, can you really Convert.
I have seen this elsewhere, from a different
perspective..
Sideways thinking — we have seen it in Quotidians
earlier.
Tangential approaches.
Sidelong glances.
Leaps of Creativity.
Those leaps?
They will come only if you generate collisions.
Some concept somewhere in one domain, some
other concept, somewhere else, in another
domain.
The doughnut in the mouth..
If it has to be made to fall..
One has to understand that the mouth is not
just for eating, but for singing too!
That is what the Fox did with the Crow.
That is what is special!
The third Creativity Future Skill is Problem
Solving.
There is a problem..
We need to resolve it..
The first thing you need to have for that
then, is a Love for Problem Solving.
You need to be okay thinking in questions,
not statements.
What if, Why not…
One has to adopt a lot of approaches.
If you make a mistake, you need to understand
what went wrong, learn a lesson, and try again
and progress.
Many of you will know this story.
A donkey slips and falls.
And, the cargo that it had been carrying is
salt, and it dissolves in the river, and hence
lightens its load.
And, so, from that day on, every time the
donkey crosses that river, it stumbles on
purpose, and reduces its load.
This guy notices..
And decides to arrive at a resolution for
this.
He loads the donkey with sponges.
Cotton.
The donkey stumbles on purpose, falls, and
the weight, instead of lightening, becomes
manifold!
It learns its mistake.
That is not the lesson for us here though.
Problem Solving.
Looking at a situation.
Looking at it through questions.
And thinking What If.
That is going to be an important skill.
And finally, the fourth skill in the realm
of Creativity, is Agility.
Fast.
Instantly.
Instinctively.
In an Agile manner.
With celerity.
Do you remember this story?
The image shows a shark, but one version of
the story also uses a crocodile.
The shark takes the monkey along, offering
to give it a delicious meal cooked by its
wife.
The monkey, idiotic monkey, accepts the ride.
But, only halfway in, the shark gloats that
the monkey has been cheated, and the actual
plan is to eat the heart of the monkey.
But that’s when the monkey demonstrates
Agility.
It says, “Oh my my, why didn’t you tell
me earlier?
I had just removed my heart and kept it hanging
from the tree..
I would have fixed it in and come along…”
That’s Agile thinking.
And that’s going to be needed.
What are the demonstrative qualities in Agile
Thinking?
Remember “Firm Convictions Loosely Held”?
We had encountered it in earlier Quotidians.
Yes, hold on to a conviction.
But, hold on to it loosely.
If you get a better conviction, immediately
be able to jump to it..!
That is a Creativity Skill.
A Future Proof Skill.
The next category is Communication.
Your idea, conveyed forcefully, impactfully,
to one or many people around you.
The first subskill in that, is the art of,
or the ability to Influence.
How many fables have we seen, featuring the
wise old fox or the cunning fox?
The fox is a weakling.
It can’t even hunt properly.
It is one-fourth the size of a lion.
But, in numerous stories, in numerous instances,
it has led the lion into traps!
How many times it has been a wise counsel
for the lion!
Why?
That is because of its ability to communicate,
its ability to influence.
If something has to be conveyed influentially,
as we have seen already, Start with Why.
Have a story?
Why do you think I picked so many stories
for you?
Because they ring a bell.
When you see these images, you will immediately
be reminded of so many nostalgic moments from
childhood, and hence it will prepare the fertile
bed in which I can sow the idea.
And, once you have that idea, once you have
that story, you need to spread it, share it,
and when you share it, don’t give instructions,
but instead, inspire them by sharing achievements
and pinnacles reached by those who followed
that advice!
When you spread such a story, it becomes a
value system and people start adopting it
immediately.
The second skill in Communication is Team
Building.
Do you remember this story?
Many of us would have read this story as,
“There were many oxen.
They were so united.
The lion couldn’t attack them.
The oxen kept butting him off.
Always, one of those oxen was always on the
lookout, helping.
And then, the fox comes, yes the same fox,
gives advice to that lion, creates a divisiveness,
splits them up, and helps the lion devour
the pack one by one.
You COULD also read it, rarely, .. in some
African versions, thus:- The oxen were separate
and disunited.
Each minding its own business.
The lion used to have a field day, attacking
them one by one.
Some of the oxen discuss and decide, “Why
can’t we be united.
Why can’t we bring ourselves together?
You run fast.
You on the other hand are tall.
You, by the way, have amazing eyesight..”
They all come together and become a single
unified beast, that can run fast, that is
tall, and has great eyesight.
And so, the lion is not able to attack any
longer.
So, create a culture people want to be part
of.
And, don’t just connect everybody with yourself,
the team leader.
Connect everybody with each other, that is
the role of a team leader, says the author.
So, Team Building becomes a very important
future-focused Skill.
Trust.
Do you remember this story?
One of them asks, “What did the bear tell
you?
I was in a hurry to save myself, I climbed
up the tree.
I saw the bear come near you, and whisper
something into your ear, that’s what it
seemed like..
What’s up?”
And the other person says, “Don’t trust
those who seem to be fairweather friends,
and rush away at the first sight of danger”.
Moral of the story apart, if you want to create
Trust, you need to tell the truth, not when
it is convenient, but when it makes you vulnerable.
If you can demonstrate that you will not stray
from the path of truth, even if it means you
will be caught in a quandary, that is how
you create a layer of Trust.
And, you have to walk the talk.
You have to perform everything that you expect
the others to do.
That is the mark of a true leader.
The benchmark of a leader who wants to inspire
that Trust.
Be a thought leader.
Trust is an important ingredient if you want
to communicate well.
That is the medium through which the communication
happens.
The final Communication subskill is Translation.
You all know this story.
An elephant.
Many blind men.
Each person interprets the animal differently.
Recently though, in a meeting I was in, people
were discussing this picture, and one of them
gave a very interesting twist to this old
story.
They said, this is exactly what happens in
our company.
The CEO, or the senior manager, gives a vision.
Conveys that this is to be done.
But, a designer or a developer or a marketer,
or a sales person, looks at it, each of them
blind metaphorically speaking, and they understand
something, and they implement it their way..
Removing the blindfold blinkers from each
person?
That is in your hands.
That is where you play an important role.
Don’t add jargon.
If something happened, if it is complicated,
the task of simplifying it is yours!
Don’t inform.
Don’t distribute.
Educate.
And, when educating, whatever you say, make
it accessible.
Can a simpleton understand it..
Make it achievable.
Can an average person REACH the goal?
And make it actionable.
Don’t make them wonder, “Story was good,
but what is it that you want me to do?!”
Give them something to do.
That is Translation, an important Skill.
Finally, the Control aspect.
Four qualities there.
The first Skill, is Self Control.
Understanding yourself very well.
Keeping a good control over yourself at all
times.
Do you remember this story?
Two cocks get into a fight.
One wins.
The other slinks away.
The victor, unable to control itself, climbs
up a roof to proclaim its world-beater status..
Cock-a-doodle-doo.
The eagle looking for prey, swoops down and
grabs the easy picking.
And, the losing cock will actually win the
day, for that is going to be the head of the
roost from then on.
So, self-control is very important.
Be self-aware.
Focusing narrowly, rather than spreading yourself
distractedly.
Control what you can.
Don’t obsess about things that you can’t
possibly control.
And finally, if you are suffused with emotion,
it is actually a feedback to something that
has happened to you.
And that feedback may not always be true — keep
that in mind.
That self-awareness?
That is the first Forever Skill under the
Control aspect.
Secondly, they advise that Resource Management
is very important.
What do you have?
What are you going to do with those?
You have to spend it wisely.
You have to create value.
Something meaningful out of something meaningless.
The timing is everything.
Do you do it at the right time, in the right
place?
You also have to assume things could go wrong.
Do you remember this story?
The Musicians of Bremen?
A dog, a donkey, a cat, a cock, chased away
from their respective homes..
For having outlived their usefulness.
But they come together, they use their resources
well, they drive away some theives in a house..
An interesting story — read it if you haven’t
yet.
They don’t even have good skills.
They can’t even sing well.
But, they come together to create an orchestra.
The Musicians of Bremen.
This is what should come to your mind when
you think about optimised resource management
which is an important Forever Skill.
Order.
In that story, the Ant seems to be working
round the clock.
While the Grasshopper keeps playing all the
time.
And, we think, the Ant is a future-conscious
animal.
An insect concerned about the rainy days coming.
Not really.
The Ant likes ORDER.
In the mind of the insect, there is this little
thing called “bringing order from chaos”
embedded as a genetic code in its little brain.
Go in a line.
Work this much.
As an obsession.
So, have something like that in your own daily
life.
Establish a routine that allows you to strive
for clarity.
Is everything foggy?
Aim for clearing the air.
Something that allows you to
get closer to certainty.
It is uncertain now, perhaps.
But, if I do this regularly, will it get me
closer to certainty?
Establish a convention.
Do it if you can.
Don’t do it if you can’t.
But, don’t make us think you can do it when
you actually can’t!
Are you even predictable.
Aim for accountability.
Why do we establish a convention?
Everything can’t be documented in a rulebook.
So, we try to tell you, “Hey, how about
we take this as a convention.
It won’t be written.
But, we take this as a thumbrule.
When you don’t have any documentation, this
is how you have to do it”.
That is aiming for Order.
And, finally, Implementation.
Anybody can talk hot air!
But, one needs to DEMONSTRATE!
An ounce of actual implementation is worth
pounds of empty talk, they say.
Remember this story?
Who will bell the cat?
The mice, each of them will propose something
amazing.
One would talk about a radar device.
Another would propose a GPS finder.
Another, a bell, plain and simple.
A battery-operated….
But that is when the wizened old mouse will
ask, “All that is fine, but who will bell
the cat?”
That is implementation-focus.
Make mistakes, that’s alright.
But, MAKE.
Fail early.
Fail often.
Have few options.
Don’t get caught in analysis paralysis.
Finish what you started.
It is not enough to begin.
You need to finish.
And finally, don’t do anything expecting
a specific result.
Enjoy the journey.
Learn the lessons in the journey.
Go back to re-implementation.
That is the twelfth of the Forever Skills
that we saw today.
Twelve Eternal Skills.
As a closing thought, I would like to share
an important quote from this Greek philosopher,
Heraclitus.
He said, “No one steps into the same river
twice.”
(Two reasons!)
“For, it is not the same river, and they
are not the same person”.
You change the water, the water changes you!
So, we live a life filled with experiences.
If we scrutinise every experience, and look
to learn something from that.. if I can expand
my Mental Model, correct flawed models, add
fine nuances to it, you are set for life.
Thank you, we will meet again next week!